Say so what's going on.
All right.
So let's go ahead and find the domain of a couple of different functions.
So remember the domain is the allowable input into a function it's whatever you can input remember sometimes
there are some values that you cannot input.
So let's get started.
Find the domain of f of x y and f of x equals x plus 3.
So let me know what are the values that are allowed to be input into this function X plus 3.
So go ahead and pause the video and give it a shot.
All right.
So remember that domain is all real numbers except in three situations.
Those three situations are division by zero.
Then we have negative numbers.
Under even root's.
And finally we have practical applications.
All right.
So these are the three situations in which the domain cannot be all real numbers.
So in this case x plus 3 we do not have any division by zero.
We do not have any even roods and we're not given any context as to what this function is.
So there's really no practical applications involved for that reason the domain for this function is
all real numbers.
All right.
That means you can plug in whatever number you want into this function and it's going to be OK.
You're going to get a results.
Let's look at another example.
All right.
So here is our next example.
Find the domain of f of x when f of x equals 3x over X plus 1 times X minus 2.
Let's find the domain of this function.
Go ahead and pause the video and try it out.
All right so let's see what you got for this one.
So remember division by zero negatives under even roots and practical applications are reasons why that
domain couldn't be all real numbers.
Remember we could have a combination of maybe two or maybe all three but which one do we have here.
If you look at it I think it's pretty obvious that it is division by zero.
See this.
It has a bottom.
It has a denominator and this denominator could be zero.
How could it be 0.
Well it turns out that you have two things that are multiplying.
And the bottom here.
X plus 1 an X minus 2.
And remember that if you multiply something by 0 then you get 0 everywhere.
So if either this is 0 or this is zero then you're going to get division by zero.
So we need to check for two cases when this is zero.
And when this is zero.
So let's first deal with this.
X plus 1.
So one is X plus one equals zero.
Well what we do is we pretty much put X plus one equals zero and we solve for x.
So we need to move this plus one to the other side and to do that we subtract one from both sides.
X equals zero minus 1 which is minus 1 and in fact it kind of makes sense if you put minus 1 plus 1
that's going to give you zero here and then zero times whatever you get here which doesn't matter gives
you a zero on the denominator.
So this function can not accept this negative one as input.
What is the other case the other case is when X minus two equals zero.
So when does X minus two equals zero.
Well go ahead and write X minus 2.
We're going to set it equal to zero and we're going to solve for x.
So this is a negative 2 to move to the other side.
We need to do plus two and both sides.
Cancels out x equals zero plus two.
That is a two.
And again that makes sense because if you plug in two into this function when you get to this part you're
going to have to minus two which is zero.
Therefore this too cannot be input into the function either.
After that we know that we do not have any roots and we do not have any practical applications.
Therefore the domain of this function is all real numbers
accept
negative 1 and 2 because when you plug in either negative one or two into this function you get division
by zero.
This right here is your answer.
All right so here we have another example.
Find the domain of f of x when f of x equals the fourth roots of X minus 6.
So go ahead and pause the video and give it a shot.
All right so let's see how you do it.
So we do not have division by zero and we do not have practical applications.
However we do have an even root that could have a negative number here depending on the input.
So remember that because this is an even rudes a number and side cannot be negative.
So how do we make sure of that.
Well what we need to do is we need to say X minus 6
is greater than zero.
And after we do this we need to solve for x.
So we do we have a negative six on this side.
So we do plus six.
Both sides
cancels out.
We have x is greater than 6 see that.
So if you plug in a number that's greater than 6 into this function that's going to give you a positive
number and it makes sense because for example if you plug in 5 into this function.
So let's say for five
so five mine is six.
It's asking for the fourth root of negative one.
Again this gives us imaginary numbers.
We do not like that.
So this is less than six.
Let's actually try a number greater than six.
Let's plug in seven.
So we're going to go ahead and plug in seven minus six
for root of 1 which is just want because one times won Times want one is one.
All right so this one is good.
This one is not so we just tested this so we got over here x is greater than six is true.
Ha but I actually missed something.
See that.
So it turns out that the square root of 0 is a valid choice.
So we don't want numbers that are just greater than 6.
We also want to include the 6.
So we say greater than or equal and here will do the same thing.
Greater than or equal right.
So x is greater than or equal to 6 because if we go ahead and plug in 6
We're going to get 6 minus 6
fourth root of 0 which is valid.
OK.
That's going to give us zero.
This one is OK as well.
All right.
So I just forgot to include the equals and I just put it in.
So numbers that are less than 6 not good 6 are greater.
They're good to go.
So a domain is
all real numbers.
That are a greater than or equal to six.
There you go.
All right.
That's pretty much it.
Let's do another example.
With roots all right so here it is.
Find the domain of f of x where f of x equals the third root of x minus 3.
Go ahead and pause the video and try this one out.
All right so what you get.
This one was a little bit tricky.
I had to admit I like giving my students tricky problems every once in a while because sometimes you'll
get tricky problems on a test on a midterm on a quiz on a final.
So you need to make sure you're ready for those curveballs.
OK.
So you might have seen this and you said oh OK so we have a route there for the number down here cannot
be negative.
And if you thought that I don't blame you because this looks very similar to the problem we just did.
However remember that for a domain The problem is only with even roots.
All right even means 2 4 6 8 etc. etc. Even means divisible by 2.
So this gives you a problem
when you haven't even roots you cannot get a negative number under there.
However we haven't even read here.
We do not.
It's odd.
Right because it's three remember that odds are 1 3 5 7.
In other words not divisible by two.
So because we have an odd route it's OK to have negative numbers under here.
All right.
And again we do not have any practical applications and we do not have any division by zero.
Therefore the domain of this function is surprisingly all real numbers.
All right and here we have our last exercise.
So let's say that f of x represents the pollution levels of a city and X the input is the number of
days since January 1st 1996.
What's the domain of f IVAX.
Go ahead and pause the video and try this one out.
What do you think is the domain here.
So X the input.
Remember that domain relates to input is the number of days since January 1st 1996.
Let's say that before 1996 we didn't have any pollution data only on January 1st 1996 we started recording
this data.
So would it make sense to plug in negative 20 into this function.
The problem with that is like I said we do not have any pollution data from before this date.
So it looks like you cannot plug in any negative numbers into this function.
All right.
So that's number one.
No negative numbers
OK what else is there.
And by the way notice that we were not even given the function f of x the function itself doesn't really
matter.
Okay.
So we can plug in negative numbers what else.
So we're counting number of days.
That means that it doesn't make sense to plug in point seventy five or two point twenty three or a five
point forty nine plugging in numbers with decimals does not make sense because we're measuring by days.
So no decimals
so no negative numbers allowed no decimals allowed.
Then with this we know what our domain is our domain is not all real numbers because our real numbers
would include the negatives and it would also include the decimals.
So it cannot be all real numbers.
So if you cannot plug in any negative numbers it starts at zero.
Right.
And if you cannot plug in decimals then you're plugging in whole numbers whole numbers are 0 1 2 3 cetera.
Are you counting numbers basically.
Right.
So it turns out our domain is all whole numbers.
This is our answer.
So it turns out that whole numbers do not include negative numbers by definition.
Ok so if we say all home numbers that is 0 1 2 3 4 5 etc. etc. Remember that we have something called
integers.
Integers look like this as well 0 1 2 3 etc. but integers include negative numbers and we said no negative
numbers.
So you could technically write this as zero and all positive integers.
That's another valid option for the domain but we chose to go with whole numbers because the definition
of a whole number fits perfectly with the domain for this problem.
The main takeaway from here is sometimes you'll have practical constraints that tell you that you cannot
plug in certain numbers into certain functions.
In this case we're starting to record pollution since this date.
So we cannot go back in time because we have no data.
And second since we're measuring number of days not parts of days then we cannot have any decimals.
That's why our domain is all whole numbers.
All right.
The more domain problems that you do the better you will get at it.
So so go ahead and take your homework and do some problems on domain.
If you were not assigned any problems just go to the book and take three four maybe five problems and
find the domain for those.
All right I'll see you in the next tutorial.